.devcontainer/README.md, before:

# FUEL ROS 2 Jazzy Development Container

This devcontainer provides a complete development environment for FUEL with ROS 2 Jazzy, built using a Dockerfile for optimal performance and reproducibility.

## Features

- **Base Image**: ROS 2 Jazzy Desktop Full (Ubuntu 24.04)
- **Pre-built Dependencies** (installed during image build):
  - NLopt v2.7.1 (as specified in project README)
  - Armadillo (linear algebra library)
  - PCL (Point Cloud Library)
  - Eigen3
  - All required ROS 2 packages (tf2, visualization, sensor/nav messages, etc.)
  - colcon build tools
  - rosdep

- **VS Code Extensions**:
  - C/C++ Tools
  - CMake Tools
  - Python
  - ROS extension
  - XML and YAML support
  - Code Spell Checker

- **Convenient Aliases**:
  - `cb` - Build workspace with symlink install
  - `ct` - Run colcon tests
  - `cbp <package>` - Build specific package
  - `cbs <package>` - Build package and dependencies
  - `cclean` - Clean build artifacts

## Dockerfile Approach

This devcontainer uses a Dockerfile instead of post-create scripts for several advantages:

- **Faster Startup:** All dependencies are pre-installed during image build
- **Better Caching:** Docker layers are cached, making rebuilds faster  
- **Reproducibility:** Same image can be used across different environments
- **Portability:** Can be built and run outside VS Code if needed

## Usage

### Opening in VS Code

1. Install the [Dev Containers extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers)
2. Open this repository in VS Code
3. Click on the green button in the bottom-left corner
4. Select "Reopen in Container"

The first time you open the container, it will build the Docker image:
- Build ROS 2 Jazzy base image
- Install all system dependencies
- Build and install NLopt v2.7.1
- Set up the development environment

This may take 10-15 minutes on the first build. Subsequent starts are much faster thanks to Docker caching.

### Building the Workspace

After the container is ready:

```bash
# Build all packages
colcon build --symlink-install

# Or use the alias
cb

# Build a specific package
colcon build --symlink-install --packages-select <package_name>

# Or use the alias
cbp <package_name>
```

### Running with GUI (RViz, etc.)

The devcontainer is configured to forward X11 for GUI applications:

**On Linux:**
```bash
# Allow X server connections (run on host before starting container)
xhost +local:docker
```

**On Windows/Mac:**
Install an X server like:
- Windows: [VcXsrv](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vcxsrv/)
- Mac: [XQuartz](https://www.xquartz.org/)

### Sourcing the Workspace

After building, source the workspace overlay:

```bash
source install/setup.bash
```

Or uncomment the line in `~/.bashrc` to source automatically:
```bash
# In the container's terminal
nano ~/.bashrc
# Uncomment: # source /workspace/install/setup.bash
```

## Project Structure

The workspace root (`/workspace`) maps to your local repository directory. All changes made in the container are reflected in your local filesystem.

## Troubleshooting

### GUI Applications Don't Display

1. **Linux**: Make sure you ran `xhost +local:docker` on the host
2. **Windows/Mac**: Ensure your X server is running and DISPLAY is set correctly

### Build Errors

1. Clean the workspace: `cclean` or `rm -rf build install log`
2. Source ROS 2: `source /opt/ros/jazzy/setup.bash`
3. Rebuild: `colcon build --symlink-install`

### Permission Issues

The devcontainer runs as user `vscode` (UID 1000). If you encounter permission issues, check file ownership:

```bash
sudo chown -R vscode:vscode /workspace
```

## Rebuilding the Container

If you make changes to the Dockerfile or need to update dependencies:

1. Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P / Cmd+Shift+P)
2. Select "Dev Containers: Rebuild Container"

This will rebuild the Docker image with any changes you've made.

## Customization

You can customize the devcontainer by editing:
- `.devcontainer/Dockerfile` - Docker image configuration and dependencies
- `.devcontainer/devcontainer.json` - VS Code dev container settings

## Additional Resources

- [ROS 2 Jazzy Documentation](https://docs.ros.org/en/jazzy/)
- [colcon Documentation](https://colcon.readthedocs.io/)
- [VS Code Dev Containers](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/containers)

Commit message:

feat(devcontainer): Migrate to docker-compose, install nvim/lazygit/ripgrep, and fix user permissions

.devcontainer/README.md, after:

# FUEL ROS 2 Jazzy Development Container

This devcontainer provides a complete development environment for FUEL with ROS 2 Jazzy, built using a Docker Compose for optimal performance and reproducibility.

## Features

- **Base Image**: ROS 2 Jazzy Desktop Full (Ubuntu 24.04)
- **Pre-built Dependencies** (installed during image build):
  - NLopt v2.7.1 (as specified in project README)
  - Armadillo (linear algebra library)
  - PCL (Point Cloud Library)
  - Eigen3
  - All required ROS 2 packages (tf2, visualization, sensor/nav messages, etc.)
  - colcon build tools
  - rosdep

- **VS Code Extensions**:
  - C/C++ Tools
  - CMake Tools
  - Python
  - ROS extension
  - XML and YAML support
  - Code Spell Checker

- **Convenient Aliases**:
  - `cb` - Build workspace with symlink install
  - `ct` - Run colcon tests
  - `cbp <package>` - Build specific package
  - `cbs <package>` - Build package and dependencies
  - `cclean` - Clean build artifacts

## Docker Compose Approach

This devcontainer uses a `docker-compose.yml` file to define the service, building from a Dockerfile. This approach offers several advantages:

- **Unified Configuration:** Centralizes environment variables, volume mounts, and runtime options.
- **Faster Startup:** All dependencies are pre-installed during image build.
- **Better Caching:** Docker layers are cached, making rebuilds faster.
- **Reproducibility:** Same image can be used across different environments.
- **Portability:** Can be built and run outside VS Code if needed.
- **Multi-service Support:** Easily extendable to include additional services if required.

## Usage

### Opening in VS Code

1. Install the [Dev Containers extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers)
2. Open this repository in VS Code
3. Click on the green button in the bottom-left corner
4. Select "Reopen in Container"

The first time you open the container, it will build the Docker image defined in `docker-compose.yml`:
- Build ROS 2 Jazzy base image
- Install all system dependencies
- Build and install NLopt v2.7.1
- Set up the development environment

This may take 10-15 minutes on the first build. Subsequent starts are much faster thanks to Docker caching.

### Building the Workspace

After the container is ready:

```bash
# Build all packages
colcon build --symlink-install

# Or use the alias
cb

# Build a specific package
colcon build --symlink-install --packages-select <package_name>

# Or use the alias
cbp <package_name>
```

### Running with GUI (RViz, etc.)

The devcontainer is configured to forward X11 for GUI applications:

**On Linux:**
```bash
# Allow X server connections (run on host before starting container)
xhost +local:docker
```

**On Windows/Mac:**
Install an X server like:
- Windows: [VcXsrv](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vcxsrv/)
- Mac: [XQuartz](https://www.xquartz.org/)

### Sourcing the Workspace

After building, source the workspace overlay:

```bash
source install/setup.bash
```

Or uncomment the line in `~/.bashrc` to source automatically:
```bash
# In the container's terminal
nano ~/.bashrc
# Uncomment: # source /workspace/install/setup.bash
```

## Project Structure

The workspace root (`/workspace`) maps to your local repository directory. All changes made in the container are reflected in your local filesystem.

## Troubleshooting

### GUI Applications Don't Display

1. **Linux**: Make sure you ran `xhost +local:docker` on the host
2. **Windows/Mac**: Ensure your X server is running and DISPLAY is set correctly

### Build Errors

1. Clean the workspace: `cclean` or `rm -rf build install log`
2. Source ROS 2: `source /opt/ros/jazzy/setup.bash`
3. Rebuild: `colcon build --symlink-install`

### Permission Issues

The devcontainer runs as user `vscode` (UID 1000). If you encounter permission issues, check file ownership:

```bash
sudo chown -R vscode:vscode /workspace
```

## Rebuilding the Container

If you make changes to the Dockerfile, `docker-compose.yml`, or need to update dependencies:

1. Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P / Cmd+Shift+P)
2. Select "Dev Containers: Rebuild Container"

This will rebuild the Docker image with any changes you've made.

## Customization

You can customize the devcontainer by editing:
- `.devcontainer/Dockerfile` - Docker image configuration and dependencies
- `.devcontainer/docker-compose.yml` - Docker Compose service definitions
- `.devcontainer/devcontainer.json` - VS Code dev container settings

## Additional Resources

- [ROS 2 Jazzy Documentation](https://docs.ros.org/en/jazzy/)
- [colcon Documentation](https://colcon.readthedocs.io/)
- [VS Code Dev Containers](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/containers)
